---
layout: post
title:  "Welcome to Phil 2109: Love, Gender, and Sex!"
---

Dear class,

Happy New Year! I hope you got some much-deserved rest over the break and have been taking care of yourselves and loved ones—I’m excited to meet you on our first day of class, Wednesday, January 21! 

My name is Ding (my pronouns are they/them and she/her). I work in an area of philosophy that examines, theorizes, and critiques our messy social world—unimaginatively called “social philosophy.” And I’m particularly interested in both how our social institutions define, administer, and discipline gender from the top down through hidden conceptual frameworks and how, in turn, queer trans women’s gender practices build a liberating alternative from the ground up.

I feel lucky to get to introduce you to a burgeoning subfield—a world of ideas, inquiries, tools, methods—so close to my heart. My hope is that you will have fun, be challenged, build community, engage with the world around you, and learn to think critically *for* yourself. I want this to become one of your favorite courses!

Now, some logistics:

- For this class, we will use Columbia’s CourseWorks/Canvas system for assignments/grades/password-protected file sharing, and then a separate, hopefully-easier-to-use [course website](https://diotima.dingherself.com) for everything else—syllabus, policies, schedule, handouts, et alia.
- This is the first time we are offering philosophy of love, gender, and sex, and we did not expect the class to become so popular! There are still 16 waitlisted students at the moment, so our first few classes will be quite cozy and some students may have to sit on the floor (sorry!!). But I would like everybody to come to class while they are on the waitlist.
- Please be sure to review our syllabus and reading schedule before class starts. There are **two very short readings assigned for our first class**—check out the schedule to find out what they are!
- There are two required texts I’ll ask you to acquire; see the syllabus for more. For all other readings, if a text is not linked directly in the schedule, I will upload it to CourseWorks > Files.
- Unlike other courses in the humanities, we are not going to read as many pages a week; instead, you may find the readings a lot denser than you are used to. So, take the time you need to read the assigned texts carefully and critically in advance of each class, participate in class discussions actively and regularly, and come to office hours to talk through materials that you find interesting or puzzling.

If you have any questions, please don’t be shy to get in touch! I’m teaching three courses this spring, so I’ll ask students to reach out first to our TA, Ry (cc’ed here). I try to get back to students as fast as I can, but this can get impractical and sometimes emails do get buried. If you don’t hear back from me for more than a day or two, feel free to send me a quick reminder/follow-up.

Once again, welcome! I hope you will enjoy this class, and I’m looking forward to getting to know every one of you over the course of the semester!

All my best,\
Ding