---
layout: post
title: Love, Gender, and Sex <em>Redux</em>
module: "Remix"
---

## Today

- Greene
- Start to talk about Ding’s pet project: Use love (*eros*) to think about sexuality, and sexuality to think about gender, and to do so constructively/generatively (world-making rather than world-deconstructive)
- Watch *Gender Troublemakers* (1993), featuring Mirha-Soleil Ross (“Jeanne B.”) and Xanthra Phillippa MacKay [cw: sex]
- Reminder: Course evaluations!

## Love ⇒ sex ⇒ gender

- Wittig @ Barnard 1979, as part of [S&F VI](https://digitalcollections.barnard.edu/do/baa15939-90f6-4cf4-9360-7781967535c8#page/2/mode/2up): “lesbians are not women.”
- But *of course* lesbians are women! How do you define ‘lesbian’ without ‘woman’?
- Frye: Notice how when defining ‘lesbian,’ we are making use of concepts and meanings available from a heterosexual world? Of course this distorts ‘lesbian.’ (pp. 156ff)
  - “Speaking of women who have sex with other women is like speaking of ducks who engage in arm wrestling.”
- You have to have a way of generating new concepts and new meanings.
  - It can’t be that the meaning of ‘lesbian’ is in the eye of the beholder; if anyone can be a lesbian/vegan by merely identifying as a lesbian/vegan then nobody is a lesbian/vegan.
  - So you have to have a way of generating new *shared* concepts and new *shared* meanings.
  - This is the point of community (not a sense of “inclusion”): its own world of shared social meanings and social relations; social reality/world is no more than social meanings and social relations.

- “Forget the images you’ve learned to attach / To words like cock and clit, / Chest and breasts. / Break those words open”
- “I'm a dyke, woman, female.”

